---
title: Closed doors open source
layout: post
tags: reflections open_source
---

During my time working at [XING](http://xing.com) I believe my single
biggest contribution for the company is a side project I've developed
called Xing scripts. This project started with a personal need for
working with our development environment in a more automated way. I'm
a big proponent of automating everything you can and so when I started
working I realized that there were these tasks that I would do over
and over again. Since I couldn't bare doing all this manual work I
started writing my own scripts.<!-- -**-END-**- -->

One day I showed them to one of my fellow team members and he liked
them very much. They were just a mix of quick and dirty ruby and bash
scripts. Some other people wanted to use them too so I started
packaging them as a ruby gem. And then this scripts began evolving. I
kept adding more features and it felt good. Through word of mouth more
people started hearing about them and asking for support for their own
applications, so I did. With time the gem started to gain more
traction inside the company and people have started sending patches to
add other features and supporting many more applications. This has
been very regarding for me, many people have praised me for the work
I've put into this, since it helps them work much faster.

When a new project is started one of the first things they do, or ask
me, is for support with the xing scripts, this fact helps me feel like
I've accomplished something very good and that my work on this project
is important to many people and for the company as a whole. This
feeling is the same when I do Open Source, when someone uses one of my
projects or when I collaborate on another project. The lessons I've
learned while working on this project have been many, from a technical
point of view as well as personally. For my "regular" work I'm
basically doing web stuff with Rails, but this has been an opportunity
to work with Ruby on something non web. I had some experience doing
command line applications but none of this scale. With the growth of
the number of features and applications that need to be supported I've
had to solve some very interesting problems. I've learned a lot about
OOP and software design, testing CLIs and how they interact with other
services, the importance of semantic versioning, creating a ChangeLog,
writing proper documentation, giving support to the users, "selling"
your project, etc. All these things that are not part of my daily work
and that without this project I couldn't have learned.

I guess the lesson here is that you can create stuff to solve your own
problems and maybe other people's too. Other people might be
struggling with the same problems and have their own solutions, so you
can unite and work together. Open source doesn't have to be code on
github, it can be internal projects inside your company, whether
they're tools, libraries, silly web sites, etc. just share them.

Enjoy!