---
title: Changing to devops
layout: post
tags: devops programming systems reflections
---

It's been over 3 months since my change to the site operations team at
Xing and time has really been flying by.

Everything is new and I really don't know what to do many times and
that I find very delightful. The investigation, learning, figuring out
how to achieve something, reading forums or stack overflow and trying
to fit a puzzle into your head. I think this is what I love the most
about computers, that moment when you understand the machine, what it
does and why it does it. It's the hack, making the computer do what
you want. Getting out of my comfort zone is helping me appreciate the
basics more.

During this time, I've played with many technologies, different
programming languages, libraries, etc. It's not about a product
anymore I care, it's about the platform.  Even though I'm immersed in
some low level details about the systems most of the day, the work
itself feels at a higher level. The components are bigger and so are
their interactions. I could compare caring about an app with caring
for a model, the whole database instead of my schema.

But not all is about technology, the human side is very interesting as
well. I get to interact with most of the engineers working in the
company, so I talk to a very diverse range of people. Different
languages, cultures, backgrounds, etc and I have to say most people
are actually very grateful when you help them out. Others just seem
like they don't know how to ask things and I have to work on my
patience, frustration can sometimes make us say the right things in a
very wrong way, this goes for both sides. I also find that I'm more
mentally drained when I finish the work. I guess it just takes a lot
of energy to be constantly solving other's problems even if it's also
very regarding.

I'm really enjoying this big new learning experience. I feel there are
so many opportunities as when I started learning Ruby on Rails around
8 years ago. I see this as a new beginning, an evolution from
developing software to developing platforms.
