---
title: Get to know your editor
tags: reflections editors
---

As programmers we spend most of our time (apart from meetings :p)
editing text. I'm a very avid user of emacs. I've been using the
editor since 2007 after a friend took the time to explain it to me. I
had tried to use it at university but couldn't understand how to use
it, I tried also vim and it was even worse, so I ended up using
something a bit friendlier like gedit back then. Anyway, this is not
about which editor is better or worse but about sticking to
something.<!-- -**-END-**- -->

After I started learning emacs and **really** trying to use it for a
while it started to click. I was starting to work with Ruby around the
time and the support for it was quite good, Matz uses emacs so it's
not a coincidence. I've then used emacs for many other programming
languages, javascript, python, golang, etc. Every time I try a new
programming language I improve my emacs to support it, I'll configure
plugins or write some functions and then I can work with this language
using the same workflows and tricks I've learned through the years.

I'm not trying to advocate using emacs, that is just a choice, but
after more than 10 years using it I can be very productive. So you can
do it too! When I started I didn't know all the things I could do with
my editor but I've definitely dedicated time to learn it and I've only
scratched the surface of what it can do. Knowing your editor takes
time and effort but it totally pays off.

There are many great editors out there, we're way past the vim vs
emacs debate. Those editors though great are not for everyone, try
different editors for a while until you find the one that feels right
to you. You won't know it immediately but after a couple of weeks or a
month you will and then you can choose whether or not to continue
using it.

I recommend also watching how other advanced users do things with
different editors, you get many good ideas that you can "steal" for
your use without having to necessarily change your tools.

My recommendation is if you're struggling with your editor just try
something different, try a change that will help you in the long term,
once you master your basic tools you can then move on and tackle
higher level issues about how you work. If you've been using the same
editor for a while and are comfortable with it try to push your
boundaries. Look for tutorials or demos, investigate the menus, read
the documentation, there'll be tips and tricks that you can slowly add
to your bag. Don't try to learn everything in one day, do it
regularly, a little bit (5 minutes?) every day and you'll see how you
master your editor sooner than you may think.

Here are a few links that could be of interest.

[Mastering emacs](https://www.masteringemacs.org)
[Emacs is sexy](http://emacs.sexy)
[How to learn vim a four week plan](https://medium.com/actualize-network/how-to-learn-vim-a-four-week-plan-cd8b376a9b85)
[Openvim](http://www.openvim.com)
[Visual Studio Code tricks](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/tips-and-tricks)
