---
title: Pair Programming Roles
tags: pair_programming
---

When pair programming people will be playing one of two roles. One is
the person writing the code and the other one is on their side. Many
people will call the person writing the code the "Driver" and the
other one as the "Navigator" as in an analogy to driving a car.<!-- -**-END-**- -->

The driver has a role related to the mechanics of the code writing. In
order to have a smooth ride and pair programming session, the driver
must have good control over their environment. When you're in a car if
the driver hits the breaks too strong, has problems changing gears and
the car goes off, or goes too fast and is reckless that makes for a
very bad ride. The same goes with pairing, the person writing the code
must follow certain rules so things can work. They need to be
communicative, keep the other person in the loop about what they're
doing, what are they thinking, the algorithm thinking, etc. They need
to have a good level of mastery on using the tools, being the editor,
the shell, an IDE, etc. Being able to quickly look for things, change
files, split windows, run tests, etc. The coding itself doesn't need
to be fast, on the contrary going too fast will make things harder and
less enjoyable to the partner, what is needed is **smoothness**. The
rythm of the session follows the rythm of the conversation.

The navigator plays a crucial role in ensuring the ride is smooth
too. Programming is full of details, we usually make many little
mistakes that make you waste time, the typos, wrong variable names,
off-by-one errors, etc. they help spotting them so that things go
without bumps. They need to keep the conversation going, they need to
keep engaged with the writer so they won't go into "the zone".
Providing assistance when in doubt. I personally like to pair program
with a secondary laptop. This one is not used for the main activity
but can as help, looking for documentation on the side, when stuck and
looking for something in google it can actually be more productive to
have two people looking things up in parallel. They need to be one
step ahead of the driver, keeping an eye on the goal, making sure they
stay on track, writing things down to be done later and getting them
off focus.

During pair programming sessions these roles should change but in my
opinion not too often. I think a turn of a couple of hours is good. If
you were pairing during a whole day, maybe do one session before lunch
and then change after it. The most common way I see is that the turns
will take place at each of the peers' computer. Most people will use
different editors - none better than emacs of course ;) - operative
systems, terminal, etc, so this is sometimes a barrier to swap
easily. Companies that are very commited to pair program would use a
common set of tools that everyone needs to know but I haven't
personally been in a place like that.

This is a very simplistic definition of the roles, I've only scratched
the surface of the topic but I hope it makes you think of the concept
of a good pairing session as a good car trip with your peer. Pilot and
co-pilot working together to get to the destionation safe, relaxed,
having a good conversation, having fun and without getting lost.

{% include _newsletter_signup.html %}
